# Authentication Configuration

**Repository:** `federator`  
**Description:** `authentication configuration`

<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: OGL-UK-3.0 -->

--- 

# Outlines the Federator server and client authentication configuration process.

A client and server authenticate with each other by using cryptographic hash (ie a one way function) value to provide proof of authentication (ie to prove they are who they claim to be).

A server is configured with the two properties: a hash value, and a salt value (in [access.json](server-configuration.md#access-json)). A servers hash property value is generated and configured before starting the service.  This hash value is generated by taking the clients password postfixed with the salt value and passing it through a SHA3 hash function.
A client is configured with a password property (in [connection-configuration.json](client-configuration.md#connection-configuration-json)).

To configure the authentication a new hash value is to be created for each client, and placed into the servers access.json file.

The process of authentication follows the following use case:
1. When a server starts, it reads the access.json file and stores the hash and salt values for each client.
2. When a client starts, it establishes a network connection to a server, providing its client password from the key property within the connection-configuration.json file.
3. The server calculates the hash value by taking the password it received and adding the salt value to the end.
4. The server now compares the calculated hash value with its stored value, if the values match then the client is authenticated.

A helper jshell utility script [createClientHashValueJshell](/src/configs/jshell/createClientHashValueJshell.java) within the `src/configs/jshell/` directory has been provided that allows for the generation of the hash value.  
The script is configured with two values, the client password and a salt value.  When ran it will show the hash value to be used for that client in the servers access.json file.
See the script and it's comments for more details.

Once these values have been generated then:
- The generated hash value is to be placed in the servers configuration file (access.json) within the `hashed_key` field
- The salt value is to be placed in the servers configuration file (access.json) within the `salt` field
- The password is to be placed in the clients configuration file (connection-configuration.json) within the `key` field

---

**Maintained by the National Digital Twin Programme (NDTP).**

© Crown Copyright 2025. This work has been developed by the National Digital Twin Programme and is legally attributed to the Department for Business and Trade (UK) as the
governing entity.  
Licensed under the Open Government Licence v3.0.  
For full licensing terms, see [OGL_LICENSE.md](../OGL_LICENSE.md).
